# HTML Seiten sexy machen!

## Option 1: Chrome Developer Console

For some of the short JavaScript examples, we will be using the Chrome console. To open up the console press `Control + Shift + J` on Windows and Linux (on a Mac `Option + Command + j`) . Another way to get to the console is to right click on the web page, select Inspect, and then move to the tab called `Console`.

Inside of this console you can write JavaScript! So let's start by alerting a message. In the Chrome Console, type the following:

~~~javascript
alert("JavaScript is sweet!");
~~~

Hit enter, and you should see a pop-up window with the message you typed inside of the alert. (Make sure that when you are writing commands in the Chrome console, you always press enter after you type your code; otherwise, the code won't run.) Try it again with a different message.

If you find those pop-ups annoying, you can also tell JavaScript to log a message directly to the console, using a function called console.log:

~~~javascript
console.log("This is less obtrusive.");
~~~

Once again, after you've written the JavaScript, press enter to execute your code. You should see this message logged in the console.

As you start typing more in the console, you will see it begins to fill up quickly. If you would like to clear the console you can either type in `clear()` and press enter or press the clear icon on the top left. If you would like see learn some more keyboard shortcuts with the chrome console, you can learn more about that [here](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/chrome-devtools/shortcuts?hl=en)

## Option 2: JavaScript and HTML in 2 Separate Files

The console is great for writing little bits of JavaScript. But if you need to write code that spans multiple lines, it can be a little annoying. You'll need to type shift + enter to get a line break in the console, since just hitting enter executes your code. This isn't too much trouble for code that's a few lines, but writing a lot of JavaScript in this way can quickly get tiring.

Another option is to keep your HTML and JavaScript in separate files. To do this, you still need to include a script tag in a HTML file, and this tag should link to a separate JavaScript file. Here's how you could do it:

## first.html

~~~html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html> 
  <head>
    <title>JavaScript Test Site</title>
    <script src="first.js"></script>
  </head>
  <body>
    <p>Nothing going on yet.</p>
  </body>
</html>
~~~

In this case, we also need a file called `first.js`. So create this file, and inside of it write some JavaScript. Maybe it looks like this:

## first.js

~~~javascript
alert("Coming to you from first.js!");
~~~

As before, the code should execute as soon as you open the HTML page in Chrome.

# Exercises

Exercise 1. Create the html and javascript files shown in this step.

