# Exercises & Archives

If you want to download a complete version of the app as it should be at the end of this lab, then create a new Glitch project by cloning this repo:

- <https://github.com/wit-hdip-comp-sci-2021/playlist-1>

## Exercise 1: Review the JSON file format

Look again at the playlist as represented in:

- Step 6: Javascript Object Literal
- Step 7: JSON

Review the differences carefully.

## Exercise 2: Add a new playlist

Extend the JSON file to include an additional playlist - so that three playlists are displayed on the dashboard.

## Exercise 3: Introduce IDs

When manipulating data maintained in JSON, or other external format, each object will often require an ID in order to manipulate the information effectively. Introduce an ID for every playlist and every song, now.

For instance for a playlist:

~~~js
"playlistCollection": [
   {
     "id": "01",
     "title": "Beethoven Sonatas",
     "songs": [
~~~

... and for a song:

~~~json
{
  "id": "03",
  "title": "Piano Sonata No. 3",
  "artist": "Beethoven"
},
~~~

Place unique IDs on all your playlists and songs now. You can use any unique numbers (enclosed in double quotes) for the moment.

## Exercise 4: New Fields

Extend the playlist to have new entry called `duration`. Also, extend each song to also have a `duration` field + a `genre` field.

Modify the dashboard view to display these new fields.

## Exercise 4: 

Extend the following views:

- Welcome: Extend the welcome view to contain a more detailed outline of the purpose of the application
- About: Extend the about view to provide contact details (may be fictitious) for the author/company that created the app.

