# Exercises

## Exercise 1:

Using the `simpsons.html` and `simpsons.js` files from the last step as a guide, create a new pair of files called `exercise-01.html` and `exercise-01.js`. Make sure exercise-01.html loads exercise-01.js.

In exercise-01.js, write a function that reads a firstname, lastname and age using the `prompt` function, create and object called `user` that contains these values, and then logs that object to the console.

Hint: This is how you prompt the user for a string:

~~~javascript
const usersFirstName = prompt('enter first name');
~~~

And this is how you might store the string in an object:

~~~javascript
const user = {
  firstName: usersFirstName,
};
~~~

## Exercise 2:

Extend the program to also ask also for a greeting. Extend the object so that it has a member function 'sayHello' that, when called, prints the greeting to the console, including the name of the user.

The javascript solution to the above to exercises is on the next page - see if you can solve it first.


## Exercise 3:

Challenging!

Write a script that will read two values using prompt()

- the name of a song
- the artist who composed it

Put these two values in an object called `favourite`. Also, in this object introduce a function called `print()`, which will print the song details to the console.

Eg - it might print

~~~bash
My favorite song is Moonlight Sonata by Beethoven
~~~

If the values 'Moonlight Sonata' and "Beethoven" had been entered.




## Exercise 4: 

Also Challenging!

Answer the following questions about this code block:

~~~javascript
var firstVariable;
var secondVariable = "";
var thirdVariable = 1;
var secretMessage = "Shh!";

if(firstVariable){
  console.log("first");
} else if(firstVariable || secondVariable){
  console.log("second");
} else if(firstVariable || thirdVariable){
  console.log("third");
} else {
  console.log("fourth");
}
~~~

1.  What should the above code console.log? **Why?**
2.  What is the value of `firstVariable` when it is created?
3.  Is the value of firstVariable a "truthy" value? **Why?**
4.  Is the value of secondVariable a "truthy" value? **Why?**
5.  Is the value of thirdVariable a "truthy" value? **Why?**

Run the script - in the console or in first.js - to see if your answers are correct.

