# Array Basics

## Introduction

So far, we've seen five different primitive data types in JavaScript: `string`, `number`, `boolean`, `null`, and `undefined`. We've also seen how to store these values inside of variables.

Sometimes, however, you need a more complex data structure when building your application. For example, maybe you need a list of restaurant names so that you can display each one to a user when she's looking for a place to eat nearby. Or maybe you're doing some math and want to maintain a list of prime numbers. It would be pretty annoying to have to write

~~~javascript
const firstPrime = 2;
const secondPrime = 3;
const thirdPrime = 5;
const fourthPrime = 7;
const fifthPrime = 11;
~~~

This is fine if you know how many primes you need at the outset, but what if you didn't know how many values you needed to store? Or what if you did know how many values you needed, but the number was quite large? Writing out a variable for each one can quickly become unmanageable.

Thankfully, JavaScript provides you with a data type to help in these situations: the _array_. You can think of an array as simply a list of values.

To write an array in JavaScript, you use square brackets `[]` and comma separate each value in the array. Here are some examples:

~~~javascript
const primes = [2, 3, 5, 7, 11];
const names = ['Alice', 'Bob', 'Charlie'];
const booleans = [true, false, false, true];
const mixedTypes = [1, 'sweet', true, null, NaN, 'bye!'];
const woahhh = ['Whats up with this? -->', ['Woah', 'crazy!']];
const emptyArray = [];
~~~

You can put anything you want inside of an array: numbers (as in `primes`), strings (as in `names`), booleans (as in `booleans`), and other primitive types are all fair game. You can also have multiple different types inside of an array: just because the first element in an array is a number doesn't mean that every subsequent element needs to be a number too. For example, `mixedTypes` has many different types inside of it. You can even store arrays inside of other arrays, as in the `woahhh` array above!

At this point, you may be wondering why we didn't mention arrays when we talked about other data types in JavaScript. The reason is that up until now, we've been dealing with _primitive_ data types in JavaScript. But arrays aren't primitives; they're examples of what's called a reference type. We'll talk about reference types in more detail in the next javascript lab. For now, it's sufficient to note that

~~~javascript
console.log(typeof [1, 2, 3]);
~~~

prints `object`. So arrays are a type of object, which you used in gomix in last week's lab (more on objects later).

## Accessing and updating array values

To access an element in an array, we specify the name of the array followed by sqqare brackets brackets and the _position_ (also called the _index_) of the element we're trying to access. **Arrays are zero-indexed**, which means that the first element is accessed at index 0\. Let's look at an example:

~~~javascript
const arr1 = [5, 3, 10];
console.log(arr1[0]); // should equal 5
console.log(arr1[1]); // should equal 3
console.log(arr1[2]); // should equal 10
console.log(arr1[3]); // should be undefined -- remember, arrays are zero-indexed!
console.log(arr1[1 + 1]); // the same as arr[2], which is 10
console.log(arr1[arr1.length - 1]); // shorthand for the last element of an array, in this case 10
~~~

To update a value in an array, we can simply assign an element at a given index to a new value:

~~~javascript
const arr2 = [5, 3, 10];
arr2[0] = -1000;
arr2[2] = 'dope';
console.log(arr2); // should be [-1000, 3, 'dope']
~~~

## Adding to arrays

There are a number of ways you can add elements to an array.

One way is by setting a value at a new index in the array.

~~~javascript
const arr3 = [1,2,3];
arr3[3] = 4;
console.log(arr3); // [1,2,3,4]
~~~

Be careful with this approach, though -- you can add an element at any index, and any elements that don't have values in them will be filled with `undefined` values.

~~~javascript
const arr4 = [1,2,3];
arr4[5] = 'whoa';
console.log(arr4); // [1, 2, 3, undefined, undefined, 'woah']
~~~

If you want to add to the end of an array, a better approach is to use the `push` function - this function returns the new length (the number of elements) of the array.

~~~javascript
const arr5 = [3, 2, 5];
arr5.push(7); 
console.log(arr5); // [3, 2, 5, 7]
~~~

On the other hand, if you want to add to the beginning of an array, you can use the `unshift` function. As with `push`, `unshift` returns the length of the modified array.

~~~javascript
const arr6 = [1, 2, 3];
arr6.unshift(0);
console.log(arr6); // [0,1,2,3]
~~~

## Removing from arrays

We've seen how we can add elements from arrays. But what about removing elements?

One (not common) way to remove elements is to manually set the length of the array to a number smaller than its current length. For example:

~~~javascript
const arr7 = [1, 2, 3];
arr7.length = 2; // set the new length
console.log(arr7); // [1,2]
~~~

A more common way to remove elements from the back of an array is to use `pop()`. This function works in sort of the opposite way as `push`, by removing items one by one from the back of the array. Unlike `push`, however, `pop` doesn't return the length of the new array; instead, it returns the value that was just removed.

~~~javascript
const arr8 = [1,2,3];
arr8.pop(); // returns 3
console.log(arr8); // [1,2]
~~~

If you want to remove an element from the _front_ of an array, you should `shift()` (like `unshift`, but the opposite)! As with `pop()`, `shift()` returns the removed value.

~~~javascript
const arr9 = [1,2,3];
arr9.shift();
console.log(arr9); // [2,3]
~~~

There's also a `delete` keyword in JavaScript, which you might think could be used to delete elements in an array. However, this isn't quite how `delete` works with arrays. When you use this keyword, the value at the index where you delete will simply be replaced by `undefined`. This usually isn't what you want, which is why you won't often see people use `delete` on arrays. It's more common to see this word used with objects, which we'll talk more about in the next unit.

~~~javascript
const arr10 = [5, 4, 3, 2];
delete arr10[1];
console.log(arr10); // [5, undefined, 3, 2]
~~~

# Exercises

For these exercises, create:

- arrays-01.html
- arrays-01.js

Use this contents for the html file:

## arrays-01.html

~~~html
<html> 
  <head>
    <title>JavaScript Test Site</title>
    <script src="arrays-01.js"></script>
  </head>
  <body>
    <p>Nothing going on yet.</p>
  </body>
</html>
~~~

And use the developer tools in chrome to run and monitor the script.

## Exercise 1:

In arrays-01.js, create an array of your favorite foods (call it `favoriteFoods`). Make sure it has at least three elements.

- Access the second element in `favoriteFoods`.
- Change the last element in `favoriteFoods` to some other food.
- Remove the first element in `favoriteFoods` and store it in a variable called `formerFavoriteFood`.
- Add a favorite food to the back of the `favoriteFoods` array.
- Add a favorite food to the front of the `favoriteFoods` array.

## Exercise 2

What happens when you try to `pop` from an empty array? Create an empty array and see how chrome responds to this.

