# Array Iteration: for

Very often, you'll want to access each element of an array in order and do something with each element. For example, maybe you have an array of tweets, and you want to show each one on the page. Or maybe you have a list of numbers that you want to apply some mathematical operation to.

For instance, suppose you have an array of numbers that you want to round to the nearest whole number:

~~~javascript
const decimals = [1.1, 1.6, 2.8, 0.4, 3.5, 1.6];
~~~

One way to do this is to round each element individually using the built-in `Math.round` function:

~~~javascript
decimals[0] = Math.round(decimals[0]);
decimals[1] = Math.round(decimals[1]);
decimals[2] = Math.round(decimals[2]);
decimals[3] = Math.round(decimals[3]);
decimals[4] = Math.round(decimals[4]);
decimals[5] = Math.round(decimals[5]);
~~~

Now if you look at `decimals`, you should see that it is equal to `[1, 2, 3, 0, 4, 2]`. Great! We've rounded all of our numbers.

But this approach isn't great. What if we have 100 numbers we want to round? Or 1,000? And what if we want to do something more complicated than simply round each one? The approach we've used here doesn't scale very well.

Thankfully, there's a better way to make your way through an array and do something with each element, through a process called _iteration_, or looping. Let's talk about iteration in general, and then see how we can apply it to arrays.

## Iteration: For loops

One of the most common ways to loop is with a `for` loop. A `for` loop consists of three parts followed by a block of code inside of curly braces `{}`:

`for (initializer, condition, counter) {}`

`initializer` - this is where we can declare variables to be used in the loop. We usually declare a variable called `i` which will serve as a counter variable for the number of times that we should loop.

`condition` - this MUST be an expression that returns `true` or `false`. You can read this condition as "Keep looping as long as this condition is true."

`counter` - this is how we change the variables initialized (typically, either by increasing or decreasing them). We commonly increment variables by 1 using the `++` operator and decrement by 1 using `--`.

As long as the condition is true, the code inside the curly braces will run. After running, the counter expression will run, and then the condition will be checked again.

~~~javascript
// start with a variable called i and set it to 0
// keep looping as long as i is less than 5
// at the end of each for loop, increase the value of i
for (let a = 0; a < 5; a++) {
  console.log(a);
}

// prints out:

// 0
// 1
// 2
// 3
// 4
~~~

What gets logged if you change `i<5` to `i<10`? If you change `i++` to `i+=3`? Experimenting with the initializer, condition, and counter is a great way to develop your intuition for `for` loops!

You can use a loop to iterate through an array in a similar fashion. In this case, typically `i` refers to the current index in the array, the `condition` tells the loop to continue until `i` equals the length of the array, and the `counter` increments `i`. Let's see how we could refactor our earlier rounding example to use a for loop:

~~~javascript
const decimals2 = [1.1, 1.6, 2.8, 0.4, 3.5, 1.6];

for (let i = 0; i < decimals2.length; i++) {
    decimals2[i] = Math.round(decimals[i]);
}
~~~


## Strings Revisited

Now that we've learned about arrays, let's briefly return to strings and compare and contrast these two data types. They do have some similarities, but it's important to understand their differences as well.

#### Looping over strings

Just like we can iterate over arrays (and objects), we can also iterate over strings! Since strings have a `length` property, we always know at what point to stop looping, just like with arrays. Let's see an example of looping over a string:

~~~javascript
const name = 'elie';

for (let t = 0; t < name.length; t++) {
  console.log(name[t]);
}

// e
// l
// i
// e
~~~

# Exercises

For these exercises, create:

- arrays-03.html
- arrays-03.js

And use the developer tools in chrome to run and monitor the script.

## arrays-03.html

~~~html
<html> 
  <head>
    <title>JavaScript Test Site</title>
    <script src="arrays-03.js"></script>
  </head>
  <body>
    <p>Nothing going on yet.</p>
  </body>
</html>
~~~

## Exercises 1: Array iteration

Introduce this array:
~~~javascript
const people = ['Greg', 'Mary', 'Devon', 'James'];
~~~

- Using a loop, iterate through this array and console.log all of the people.
- Again using a loop, iterate in the reverse direction, logging the people starting at 'James' and finishing with 'Greg'

## Exercises 1: Array mutation.

Using the same array as in exercise 1:

- Write the code to remove "Greg" from the array.
- Write the code to remove "James" from the array.
- Write the code to add "Matt" to the front of the array.
- Write the code to add your name to the end of the array.

